# eDNAModel
The eDNAModel package is designed for fitting occupancy models to environmental DNA (eDNA) data. It takes as input a three-dimensional array containing species-by-site-by-replicate detection data, reflecting the hierarchical structure typical of eDNA surveys. Estimating two key components: the probability that a species is present at a site (occupancy probability) and the probability of detecting the species given it is present (detection probability). The package supports the inclusion of covariates for both occupancy and detection processes, making it a valuable tool for assessing species distributions, habitat associations, and monitoring biodiversity through eDNA.

######################################################################################################################################################
 That typical R syntax model formulae can be used to flexibly model detection/occupancy OTUs in a mixed modelling framework as a function of covariates (either continuous or categorical) and grouping variables, as either fixed effects or random effects. For example in the case of PCR replicate within sample, sample is obviously a random effect, however if others are performing experiments with repeated measures over time of different treatments etc there may be other relevant random effects. The more flexible this is the more usable for either bespoke experiments, time-series data, nested designs etc
 
 This is essentially covered by the above, and so perhaps redundant, but the ability to define the relevant grouping level at which the detection/occupancy estimates and their uncertainty are delivered (i.e. site, group of sites in a location etc etc) is essential..
Given (1) the ability to perform at least model selection .. in an ideal world some out of the box functions for model averaging / cross-validation (hell, this is a hopes and dreams list after all).
I think this is a given, and related to all the above but the ability to choose different error distributions (poisson, neg.binomial,  quasi’s of these, ZIP, ZINB as appropriate… gamma???)

 The implementation of the existing multinomial method that we are modifying (ours count based, ML  - theirs multinomial, bayesian) and extending (with PCR replicate inclusion) . Fortunately, it seems like this this would just require a wrapper as it seems these guys have finally gotten around to it themselves for R. The would serve multiple purposes 1) To benchmark our approach and 2) as a primer for demonstrating the overlap between multinomial and count/offset based approaches (and whatever potential benefits our approach facilitates over this).

Related to (1, 2, 5) our approach should also be able to facilitate metabarcoding data that does not have PCR replicate (i.e. where all replicates are pooled before sequencing). Doing so may also illuminate the utility (or not) of separately indexing each PCR or simply pooling them together.

Related to the cutoff that Marwah applied to the test data that I supplied (OTUs <30 total counts removed) - the ability to dynamically pre-filter data so there will be no convergence issues. This would of course be dependent on sequencing depth and the co-occurrence of OTUs between PCR replicates within samples and between replicate samples for each sampling occasion, and so must be dynamic based on the characteristics of the dataset.  Doing so would also demonstrate so basic requirements for obtaining stable detection/occupancy estimates.

As in the existing multinomial method, it is useful to see occupancy estimates in relation to the “sequence relative dominance” so if we could get these estimates too that would be helpful.
